[ENH] Derived (processed) MR data (#207)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/05-derivatives/01-introduction.md

# Goals and scope

Derivatives are outputs of common processing pipelines, capturing data and
meta-data sufficient for a researcher to understand and (critically) reuse those
outputs in subsequent processing. Standardizing derivatives is motivated by use
cases where formalized machine-readable access to processed data enables higher
level processing.

## Storage of derived datasets

Derivatives can be stored/distributed in two ways:

1.  Under a `derivatives/` subfolder in the root of the source BIDS dataset
    folder to make a clear distinction between raw data and results of data
    processing. Each pipeline has a dedicated directory under which it stores
    all of its outputs. There are few restriction on the directory name; it is
    RECOMMENDED to use the format `<pipeline>-<variant>` in cases where it is
    anticipated that the same pipeline will output more than one variant (e.g.,
    `AFNI-blurring`, `AFNI-noblurring`, etc.). For the sake of consistency, the

>     subfolder name needs to be a substring of `PipelineDescription.Name` field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    subfolder name MUST be a substring of `PipelineDescription.Name` field
```
to be clear?

    in the `dataset_description.json` (see below).

    For example:

    ```Text
    <dataset>/derivatives/fmripreprocess-v1/sub-0001
    <dataset>/derivatives/spm/sub-0001
    <dataset>/derivatives/vbm/sub-0001

>     ```

Author: This does not render correctly. https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/derivatives/05-derivatives/01-introduction.html#storage-of-derived-datasets

1.  As a standalone dataset independent of the source (raw or derived) BIDS
    dataset. This way of specifying derivatives is particularly useful when the
    source dataset is provided with read-only access, and for publishing
    derivatives as independent bodies of work, or for describing derivatives
    that were created from more than one source dataset. It is consistent with
    BIDS principles for the `sourcedata/` subdirectory to be used to include or
    reference the source dataset(s) as it existed when the derivatives were

>     generated. Likewise, any code used to generate the derivatives from the

Reviewer: > It is consistent with
    BIDS principles for the `sourcedata/` subdirectory to be used to include or
    reference the source dataset(s) as it existed when the derivatives were
    generated.

This sentence is not very readable, please rephrase.

Author: Please see updated text.

    source data may be included in the `code/` subdirectory.

The rest of the Derivatives specification assumes Case 1, but Case 2 applies
after removing `/derivatives/<pipeline_name>` from template names. In both cases
every derivatives dataset is considered a BIDS dataset and must include a
`dataset_description.json` file at the root level. Consequently, files should be

> organized to comply with the BIDS to the full extent possible (i.e., unless

Reviewer: ```suggestion
organized to comply with BIDS to the full extent possible (i.e., unless
```
When unpacking BIDS into Brain Imaging Data Structure, `the BIDS` makes sense ... but without unpacking, it sounds off.

I suggest to just refer to BIDS, not the BIDS - because that's what people do in their day to day conversations as well

explicitly contradicted below). Any subject-specific derivatives should be
housed within each subject’s directory; if session-specific derivatives are
generated, they should be deposited under a session subdirectory within the
corresponding subject directory; and so on.

## Derived dataset and pipeline description

As for any BIDS dataset a `dataset_description.json` file MUST be found at the
top level of the particular pipeline:
`<dataset>/derivatives/<pipeline_name>/dataset_description.json`

> In addition to raw BIDS datasets derived BIDS datasets includ the following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to raw BIDS datasets, derived BIDS datasets include the following
```

| PipelineDescription.SingularityContainerURL | OPTIONAL. URL where the Singularity software container image used in this analysis can be found.                                                                                                                                             |
| SourceDatasets                              | OPTIONAL. A list of objects specifying the locations and relevant attributes of all source datasets. Valid fields in each object include `URL`, `DOI`, and `Version`.                                                                        |

Example:

```JSON
{
    "Name": "FMRIPREP Outputs",
    "BIDSVersion": "TODO (depends when this PR will be merged)",
    "PipelineDescription": {
        "Name": "FMRIPREP",
        "Version": "1.2.5",
        "DockerHubContainerTag": "poldracklab/fmriprep:1.2.5"
        },
    "SourceDatasets": [
        {
            "DOI": "10.18112/openneuro.ds000114.v1.0.1",
            "URL": "https://openneuro.org/datasets/ds000114/versions/1.0.1",
            "Version": "1.0.1"
        }
    ]
}
```

## Coordinate systems

> Coordinate system (a.k.a. space) a particular derivative is in should be denoted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The coordinate system (a.k.a. space) a particular derivative is in SHOULD be denoted
```

| GIFTI (`.gii`)               | Surface data            | Coordinate systems listed in [Template Based Coordinate Systems: Surface](../99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.md#surface). If `individual` or `custom` is used then setting `SpatialReference` is REQUIRED |
| CIFTI (`.nii`)               | Volume and surface data | Coordinate systems listed in [Template Based Coordinate Systems: Hybrid (Volume/Surface) aliases](../99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.md#hybrid-volumesurface-aliases)                                     |

Examples:

```Text
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-MNI305_bold.nii.gz
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-individual_bold.nii.gz
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-L_space-fsaverage5_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-R_space-fsaverage5_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-L_space-individual_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-R_space-individual_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-HCPMNIfsLR32k_bold.nii
```

## Common file level metadata fields

Each derivative file SHOULD be described by a JSON file provided as a sidecar or
higher up in the hierarchy of the derived dataset (according to Inheritance

> Principle - section 3.5 of the main specification) unless a particular

Reviewer: This should be a link rather than a text reference to the Inheritance Principle

### Examples

Preprocessed `bold` NIfTI file in `individual` coordinate space. Please mind
that in this case `SpatialReference` key is REQUIRED.

```Text
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-individual_bold.nii.gz
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-individual_bold.json
```

```JSON
{
    "SpatialReference": "/sub-01/anat/sub-01_desc-combined_T1w.nii.gz"
}
```

Participant cortical thickness GIFTI file in `individual` coordinate space.
Please mind that in this case `SpatialReference` key is REQUIRED.

```Text
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-L_space-individual_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-L_space-individual_thickness.json
```

```JSON
{
    "SpatialReference": "/sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-L_pial.surf.gii"
}
```

## Metadata conventions

-   Unless specified otherwise, individual sidecar JSON files and all metadata
    fields within are optional. However, the appropriate use of these files and
    pertinent fields is very valuable and thus encouraged. Moreover, for some
    types of files, there may be one or more required metadata fields, in which
    case at least one metadata file containing that field must be located

>     somewhere within the file’s hierarchy (per the Inheritance Principle).

Reviewer: again, would be nice to have a link to Inheritance Principle section here

meta-data sufficient for a researcher to understand and (critically) reuse those
outputs in subsequent processing. Standardizing derivatives is motivated by use
cases where formalized machine-readable access to processed data enables higher
level processing.

## Storage of derived datasets

Derivatives can be stored/distributed in two ways:

1.  Under a `derivatives/` subfolder in the root of the source BIDS dataset
    folder to make a clear distinction between raw data and results of data
    processing. Each pipeline has a dedicated directory under which it stores
    all of its outputs. There are few restriction on the directory name; it is
    RECOMMENDED to use the format `<pipeline>-<variant>` in cases where it is
    anticipated that the same pipeline will output more than one variant (e.g.,
    `AFNI-blurring`, `AFNI-noblurring`, etc.). For the sake of consistency, the
    subfolder name MUST be a substring of `PipelineDescription.Name` field in
    the `dataset_description.json` (see below).

    For example:

        <dataset>/derivatives/fmripreprocess-v1/sub-0001
        <dataset>/derivatives/spm/sub-0001

>         <dataset>/derivatives/vbm/sub-0001

Author: The linter does not like this, but I don't think there's another way to get a properly indented code block.

Author: * Not supported: https://github.com/Python-Markdown/markdown/issues/53]

| CIFTI (`.nii`)               | Volume and surface data | Coordinate systems listed in [Template Based Coordinate Systems: Hybrid (Volume/Surface) aliases](../99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.md#hybrid-volumesurface-aliases)                                     |

Examples:

```Text
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-MNI305_bold.nii.gz
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-individual_bold.nii.gz
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-L_space-fsaverage5_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-R_space-fsaverage5_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-L_space-individual_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-R_space-individual_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-HCPMNIfsLR32k_bold.nii
```

## Common file level metadata fields

Each derivative file SHOULD be described by a JSON file provided as a sidecar or
higher up in the hierarchy of the derived dataset (according to
[The Inheritance Principle](../02-common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle))
unless a particular derivative includes REQUIRED metadata fields in which case a

> JSON file is also REQUIRED.

Reviewer: I am currently working on a dataset with an anatomical T1w scan, on which I have run the freesurfer `recon-all` command. That creates a directory full of files:

```Text
surfer/sub-01$ tree . -L 2
.
└── recon-all
    ├── bem
    ├── label
    ├── mri
    ├── scripts
    ├── src
    ├── stats
    ├── surf
    ├── tmp
    ├── touch
    └── trash

```

Would it make sense in this case to have a `surfer/sub-01/recon-all.json` file in which I specify the metadata such as the `SpatialReference` pointing to my T1w scan?
